Sanders, Steyer Slam Inequality Amid Middle Class Income Losses
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS during Tuesday night’s Democratic presidential debate called America’s escalating income inequality a “moral and economic outrage.” Billionaire Tom Steyer called it “absolutely undemocratic and unfair.” Mayor Pete Buttigieg said Trump attracted voters because nobody is willing “to actually do anything.”

[ SEE: Cartoons on the 2020 Presidential Election ]
Though she was hammered by multiple candidates for her dismissal of automation’s role in job losses, Sen. Elizabeth Warren said all the candidates on the stage, in essence, were trying to help the middle class – a middle class that has seen its inflation-adjusted earnings fall in recent decades as the country’s richest have seen wealth accumulate.


Courtesy of USAFacts

A USAFacts analysis of Census Bureau and IRS data estimates wages, salaries and supplemental income for the country’s middle block of earners dropped more than 9% between 2000 and 2017, from an average of nearly $46,000 to just over $41,600.

But total income – which includes government transfer payments in the forms of Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, unemployment insurance and other social assistance programs – has actually ticked marginally higher for the middle class since the turn of the millennium. Thanks to a nearly 60% increase in government transfer payments, the average middle-class American’s income climbed more than 5% to more than $67,600 between 2000 and 2017.

[ READ: Trading Silence for Access: The Cost of Doing Business in China ]
Not all of those government transfers are pocketable for every American, however. The average income gain is largely a demographics story, as America’s population ages and baby boomers enter their traditional retirement years. Social Security and Medicare alone accounted for 38% of the increase in government transfers to the middle class. More broadly, national health care spending ballooned 160% between 2000 and 2017.

So candidates are correct in saying the average middle class American is taking home a smaller salary nowadays than he or she was in 2000, with respect to inflation. Government transfers and social assistance support are essentially propping up middle class income statistics.